---
title: 'Dyad: a binary-star dynamics and statistics library for Python'
tags:
  - Python
  - astronomy
  - astrodynamics
  - binary stars
  - population synthesis
authors:
  - name: Amery Gration
    orcid: 0000-0003-1379-6696
    affiliation: 1
affiliations:
  - name: Astrophysics Research Group, University of Surrey, Guildford, GU2 7XH, United Kingdom
	index: 1
    ror: 00ks66431
date: 16 January 2026
bibliography: paper.bib
---

# Summary

Dyad is a Python library for studying the dynamics of binary stars
considered as gravitational two-body systems. By convention,
astrophysicists designate the brighter of the two components of a binary
star as a reference body, which they call the \`primary star\', and the
dimmer of the two components as a subject body, which they call the
\`secondary star\'. In a frame centred on the primary star the secondary
star then moves on an elliptical orbit with one focus located at the
origin. This orbit can be specified by its orbital elements, namely the
semimajor axis (which specifies the size of the ellipse), eccentricity
(which specifies the shape of the ellipse), and true anomaly (which
specifies the secondary star\'s location on the ellipse) along with the
longitude of its ascending node, its inclination, and its argument of
pericentre (which together specify the orientation of the ellipse).

The dynamics of the system are completely determined by the two stars\'
masses and the secondary star\'s orbital elements. In a population of
binary stars these eight parameters vary from member to member and can
each be treated as a random variable having some probability
distribution. Dyad provides a class, `dyad.TwoBody`, and a module,
`dyad.stats`, for dealing with such a population of binary stars. The
`dyad.TwoBody` class represents a gravitational two-body system while
the `dyad.stats` module provides a suite of classes representing the
probability distributions of stellar mass, mass-ratio, and orbital
elements. Dyad implements these probability distributions in the same
way that SciPy [@virtanen2020] implements its probability distributions
(see, for example,
[`scipy.stats.norm`](https://docs.scipy.org/doc/scipy/reference/generated/scipy.stats.norm.html),
[`scipy.stats.lognorm`](https://docs.scipy.org/doc/scipy/reference/generated/scipy.stats.lognorm.html),
or
[`scipy.stats.expon`](https://docs.scipy.org/doc/scipy/reference/generated/scipy.stats.expon.html)).

You can initialize `dyad.TwoBody` by specifying the primary and
secondary bodies\' masses together with the secondary body\'s orbital
elements and then use that class\'s methods to compute the two bodies\'
angular momenta, total energies, and eccentricity vectors as well as
positions, velocities, kinetic energies, and potential energies either
in the primary star\'s frame or the centre-of-mass frame. The
`dyad.stats` module includes (but is not limited to) classes
representing the probability distributions of (1) stellar masses as
proposed by @kroupa2001 and @salpeter1955, and (2) the mass-ratios and
orbital elements of binary stars as proposed by @duquennoy1991 and
@moe2017. You can use it to evaluate the probability density functions,
cumulative distribution functions, and inverse cumulative distribution
functions of these quantities, as well as to compute their moments,
i.e. their means, variances, skewnesses, *etc*. Most importantly, you
can use `dyad.stats` to generate samples of these quantities. By using
`dyad.TwoBody` and `dyad.stats` together you can therefore generate a
custom representation of a population of binary stars.

# Statement of need

I wrote Dyad to perform the work on binary-star population dynamics that
my colleagues and I presented in the paper \`Stellar velocity
distributions in binary-rich ultrafaint galaxies\' [@gration2025].
Galactic dynamicists typically treat a galaxy as a population of single
stars moving in the gravitational potential generated by those stars
together with a halo of dark matter. They construct a model of its
kinematics (say, a model of the probability density of its stars\'
positions and velocities) which they then fit to obervations (say, those
stars\' on-sky positions and line-of-sight velocities) in order to infer
the physical properties of that galaxy, for example its total mass.
However, a large number of stars are binary, meaning that these models
are misspecified since the kinematics of stars in a binary-rich galaxy
are different from those in a binary-free galaxy. If observations
contain binary stars then these inferences will be wrong. The error will
be small for large disc galaxies but will be large for small spheroidal
galaxies. For these small spheroidal galaxies the total mass is always
proportional to the velocity dispersion and in our paper my colleagues
and I quantifed the error in the inferred galactic mass by constructing
the velocity distribution using Dyad.

The modelling of binary-rich galaxies is an active area of research
[see, for example, the papers by @minor2010; @rastello2020; and
@arroyo-polonio2023]. However, there is no publicly available software
dedicated to the field. The situation is different for the allied field
of population synthesis, in which stellar physicists generate a
representation of a population of binary stars by simulating the
dynamical and chemical evolution of some initial population. There is a
large amount of software that can perform these simulations. Amongst the
available packages are COSMIC [@breivik2020], COMPAS [@riley2022], and
binary~c~ [@izzard2023]. These packages invariably allow you to generate
the initial population by sampling stellar mass, mass-ratio, and orbital
elements. In that respect they provide functionality similar to Dyad\'s.
But typically they provide only the sampling routine and no further
functionality, such as the ability to evaluate the probability density
functions themselves. Moreover, each package provides a different
library of sampling routines and these do not always allow for
correlations between quantities. None of them was the laboratory that we
required for our work. That laboratory was Dyad, which I hope others
will find useful too.

# References
